LAMP commands are organized into three primary categories that form the foundation
of network automation workflows:

Management Commands
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Handle testbed and device lifecycle management. These commands load
devices from testbed YAML files or direct IP connections, switch between active devices,
and properly disconnect when finished.

Operator Commands
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Execute actual network operations and generate corresponding Blitz action
snippets. These commands perform the core automation tasks: executing CLI commands, configuring
devices, parsing outputs with Genie parsers, invoking APIs, replaying saved testcases, and adding delays.

Blitz Handlers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Manage the automation artifacts that LAMP creates from your interactive sessions.
These commands are essential because they let you track, organize, and save the autogenerated Blitz
snippets that enable LAMP's core value proposition: converting interactive exploration into reusable
automation testcases. Without these handlers, your interactive work would remain ephemeral. With them,
you can view generated snippets, organize them into test sections, save them as YAML testcases, and
most importantly, replay them using the ``replay`` command - LAMP's flagship feature that transforms
your saved snippets into function-like automation components for building complex, reusable workflows.

These three categories represent the complete LAMP workflow: manage device connections, perform operations
that auto-generate Blitz snippets, then organize and save those snippets into reusable automation testcases.